[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Dr. Demartini, welcome.
Thank you again for joining us.
>> Thank you.
>> Today, we're going to be
talking about three steps
to beating financial anxiety.
And I certainly know
I've experienced, myself,
anxiety around finances
and learning to manage
my money and my wealth.
And I've learned how
intimately related
it is to my health
and my well-being,
and that anxiety, when
we're not managing
our money and our
relationship to money,
impacts our relationship
to our health.
So I wanted to talk to you
today about three key values
that I know you have in
relationship to money,
and creating wealth,
and financial health.
>> OK, perfect.
Firstly, I'd like to
share that everybody
lives by a set of
priorities, a set of values,
things that are most
important to least
important in their life.
And that set of values
or hierarchy of values
dictates their
financial destiny.
I'm going to say it again.
The hierarchy of
one's values dictates
their financial destiny.
So let's just say you meet
somebody, and it's a woman.
And her highest value
is her children,
children's health,
children's education,
children's entertainment.
And the next is home,
furniture, socializing, travel,
and then shopping,
and fitness, and then
shoes, and shoes, and shoes,
and shoes, and shoes, and Jimmy
Choo shoes.
That set of values, even
if you went down further,
you don't see building business,
you don't see building wealth,
you don't see saving
money in that list.
So the second that woman
gets money and receives it
from whatever form, either
from working, inheritance,
or even from her
husband, that money will
spend according her values.
The hierarchy of your
values dictates how you
spend and manage your money.
It's not-- it does not
matter how much you make.
What matters is how you
manage what you make,
and your values dictate
how you manage it.
Because the second she
gets money, most of it's
going to go to her children
If there's a little extra, then
it's going to go to the house.
And a little extra,
it's going to go
to entertainment and travel.
And finally, it's going
to be shopping at the end.
You have other set of values
that shopping is at the top,
and they're consumers.
The second they get
money, they spend it
on immediate gratification
and consumerism.
And they buy depreciables
that go down in value
the moment they buy.
People that have a
wealth value system,
they have a desire to build a
business that serves people,
so they have a source of income.
They desire to manage the
business so it's profitable.
They have a desire to
save a portion of it
to build up liquidity to
stabilize the business so they
have a sustainable business
and to reduce the volatilities
and emotions.
They have a desire to invest
and learn the art of investing,
so it's working for them.
And they have a desire
to accumulate money
and a cause for money.
When they have those
values, when they get money,
instead of spending it,
they put it in investments.
So the money works for them,
and so they become its master.
Instead of them
working for money,
so they become its slave.
So the hierarchy of
one's values dictates
their financial destiny.
Now, what does that have
to do with the anxiety?
Any time you set a goal that's
not aligned with your values,
you're going to have what
I call the A, B, Cs, Ds,
Es of negativity.
Internal anger and aggression,
internal blame and feelings
of betrayal, internal
criticism and challenge,
internal despair and depression,
and the desire to escape.
And people have that around
their financial situation.
They feel frustrated
and angry at themselves.
They feel-- they
blame themselves,
they feel they
betrayed themselves.
They can't get ahead, they've
criticized themselves,
they feel depressed.
And they want to
escape their life,
and that's because
they're expecting
to get wealthy and have more
money at the end of their month
than month at the
end of their money,
but they don't have the values
that will lead them there.
So the second they get
money, they immediately
spend it and buy
depreciables and consumables
which make them go into
debt instead of actually
going to get into
assets that grow
and become financially wealthy.
So unless you have the hierarchy
of values that is really geared
towards saving and
investing in money,
it's not likely to
happen, and you're
going to have
anxieties around it.
And what's interesting
is that money circulates
through the economy from those
who value it least to those
evaluate most, and for
people who value themselves
least to people who
value themselves most.
And people that value serving
people least to those who
value serving people the most.
So that leads to three things.
If you exaggerate yourself and
project your values onto others
and minimize them,
you're not going
to meet their needs when
you're serving them,
and you won't have
a source of income.
If you minimize yourself
and exaggerate others
when you're going in
negotiation or selling,
then you also give
away the profits.
You'll negotiate
away your profits.
But if you have
equanimity within yourself
and equity between you and
others and you're equal,
then you'll care
enough to communicate
what you have to offer, your
product, services, or ideas
in terms of their values.
They'll buy it, and you'll
meet their needs, which
is a source of
income, and you'll
meet your own needs, which
you mean, I value my self.
My self-worth is up,
and I'll save a portion.
So net worth occurs when you
have other worth and self-worth
together.
It means you care enough
about others to serve them,
and you care enough
about yourself to save.
When you put those
two together, you're
on your way to having
some self-worth.
When you live by
your highest values,
you have more of
an equitable mind.
You have objective
reasoning, and you're more
understanding that it
takes serving people
to have a source of
income, and it takes
saving in order to keep that.
But if you're living in a
unfulfilled life, the animal
brain, the amygdala
comes on line,
and you want avoid
pain and seek pleasure,
and you want immediate
gratification,
and you have addictive
behaviors to consumerism,
and you're consuming other
people's brands, because you're
not fulfilled instead of
building your own brand
to fulfill yourself and others.
>> So that relationship between
self-worth and the core values,
is there an order?
And which comes first?
You have to have self-worth
first in order then
to make those core values in
order, in which they need to be
for you to attract the money?
>> Well, no.
Well, every human being has a
set of values no matter what.
It's automatically there.
They're Born and they're
evolving through their lives.
It's evolving, but they
have a core set of values.
If they set goals that match
it, they have fulfillment.
But if they don't have a
value on wealth building,
then they'll have a fantasy
about wealth building.
1% of the population or less
become financially independent,
only 1%.
So most people don't
have a value on wealth,
but they have a
value on consumerism.
They want the fancy lifestyle
of the rich and famous.
>> So they can have
a value on themself?
>> Yeah.
>> But just not a value on--
>> Well, they won't have
financial independence unless
they have a value
on wealth building.
It's not going to happen,
or unless they inherit it,
or marry somebody that has it.
So you've got a choice.
Either set goals that
match your values
to have fulfillment
that you may or may not
have financial independence
unless you have
a value on wealth building.
Or you can change your
values to match your goals.
So I train people in both
of them in my programs,
because some people have
a great set of values,
and they do want to change
it, and they're grateful.
But they just need to set
real goals that now match it
so they can feel fulfilled
and quit living in fantasies
about who they are.
Others would like to
change their values.
Really simple.
You change your
value spontaneously
by stacking up benefits
associated with it.
Let me give an example.
If a young girl
who's eight years old
is about to sing solo in front
of her elementary school,
and she's got a white
dress on, and pigtails,
and she stands up
and is about to sing,
and she goes and sings,
and she's like an angel.
Her voice is perfectly clear,
she doesn't miss a tune,
in perfect pitch, and doesn't--
And they applaud and they
give a standing ovation,
she's probably
going to sing again.
But if she goes up there,
and gets off key, forgets
her words, and everything else,
and wants to run off stage,
and people throw at
her, and boo at her,
and they don't want to
talk to her afterwards,
she may never get
up there again.
So the pleasures or the
pains associate with an event
can make you accentuate or
decentuate doing something.
So you can stack up benefits
and raise a value up
on your value list, or you
can stack up draw-backs
and lower it, and remodel
your value system.
Life's doing it anyway, but
you can do it consciously.
So I can literally
add new values
and help wealth building become
high on a person's values.
I do it every
weekend in programs
to show them how to build
wealth and their life.
Because until they have
truly a value on it,
it's not going to happen.
I mean, I've been watching
people get wealthy.
And I've interviewed
many, many billionaires.
And I can see the
people that are
poor in townships
versus very wealthy,
and they have a
different set of values.
>> So, so long as you have
a value on wealth building
but not a value on yourself,
you can still create your value?
>> Your self-worth is directly
proportionate to the congruency
between your actions
and your values.
If you're setting
a goal and you're
taking actions that's aligned
with your highest value,
your self-worth gives up.
And if you set a goal that's
not aligned with your highest
values, your
self-worth goes down,
because if you set a goal
that's aligned with your highest
values, you're disciplined,
reliable, and focused,
and you have an acute
awareness of what
it takes to see
opportunities and act on it.
But if you're setting goals that
aren't really important to you,
you'll procrastinate,
hestitate, and frustrate.
You'll be unfulfilled.
If it's challenging,
you'll give up on it,
and you'll want immediate
gratification to compensate.
The key is to set goals
that are congruent.
The key is to make sure you
have a value on wealth building.
If you put those
two together, you're
on your way to get
to one-percenters.
If not, you're going
to bang your head
against the wall with the
A, B, C, Ds of negativity
and think there's
something wrong with you.
And your self-worth
is going to go down,
because you're trying to be
wealthy without the values that
will lead you there.
And the second you get
money, you keep spending it.
You go, I keep sabotaging.
Why am I doing that?
Why don't I blow my money?
No, you're not blowing money.
You're spending it on what
really is valuable to you.
You just think you have a
value on wealth building.
I asked people, 5,000
people in South Africa.
And I stood up and
I said, how many
do you want to be
financially independent?
All the hands went up.
I said, quickly, write
down on a piece of paper.
I'm going to give you 30,
60 seconds to write down
what you would do if I give
you $10 million dollars US.
So on your mark, get
set, you got 60 seconds.
Go.
The 10 most important things you
would do if all of a sudden you
had $10 million, and you
never had to work again.
And they quickly
wrote it all down.
I said, now pass it to
the person next to you,
and then calculate how
much of that $10 million
is spent and left as
actually cash left.
99% of that room had spent
between $2 million and $8
million in less than a minute.
I could go on that trip,
I could buy that new car.
They were all
buying depreciables,
and they were fantasizing
about the wealthy lifestyle.
Those people will never be
financially independent.
There were seven people
out of 5,000 people
that honestly wrote down what
they would do with investments
to make it $20 million.
Those are the seven
that are going
to be financially
independent, because if you
don't have a value
on wealth building,
it's not going to happen.
And people have
fantasies all the time.
And they go, I can't
seem to get ahead.
They have plenty of money.
I've seen people double
and quadruple their income
over a 20-year period
and still can't
pay their bills, because it's
not about how much you make.
It's about how you
manage what you make,
and how you manage it
is based on your values.
>> And I remember experiencing
exactly what you're talking
about.
I listened to a whole series
on your financial coaching.
And one part of it
always stuck with me,
and it was the simple
commitment to put 10% away
of everything that you want.
From the moment I listened
to that one line on that CD,
I started from that day onwards.
The next paycheck, I
started putting 10% away.
And just how it made
me feel the moment I
did that, it alleviated
so much anxiety,
because I knew at a
level, I was I was saving.
Even if it felt like a
struggle to put that 10% away,
I'd look at where I'd have to
stop spending in order to be
able to put that 10% away.
And how that made me feel
changed my whole mindset.
>> And you attracted more
opportunities for money.
>> I did.
>> Yeah, because when
you manage money wisely,
you get more money to manage.
It's a basic law.
People always wait
for extra to do it,
but Parkinson's law
won't allow them to.
If you don't spend your money on
savings and investments upfront
and pay yourself
first, you will always
have unexpected bills come
into erode the possibility.
You can't pay yourself last.
You pay yourself first.
Rich people automatically
pay themselves first.
Poor people automatically
pay themselves last.
So it's been historically shown.
You have to value yourself,
and you have to value wealth.
And I made a statement.
Boy, this is really going to
push the buttons out there.
I was speaking at a
church, and the room--
I wouldn't say it was
the wealthiest church.
It was kind of a mid-range.
And I said, if you're
poor, it's because you
don't care about
humanity, and I just
paused, just to see
what their reaction is.
And people, you could see them
ruffling of their feathers,
sitting up.
I said, because if you
care about humanity,
you're going to go find
out what people need,
and you're going to directly
or indirectly find a solution
to solve those needs, because
you care about people,
and you want to help them.
When you do, you have
a source of income.
If you don't care about
humanity and you're
kind of living in this
socialistic world,
the world's supposed
to take care of you,
and entitlement instead
of an empowerment,
you'll be poor in life.
You have to care about
humanity to go out
and find a way of serving it.
You have a talent.
You have a unique,
competitive advantage
based on whatever's highest on
your values, and it's service.
If you value that, you
have a source of service.
But if you don't value
you, you won't keep it.
And you started valuing you.
And when you-- the
moment you value you,
the world starts valuing you.
As long as you pay
yourself first,
other people start
paying you first.
And I think also, another
lesson that I learned,
and I'm still refining,
still learning
within that space
is the relationship,
the mental and emotional
relationship towards money
and valuing money itself.
So valuing-- if I
see a $0.05 piece,
I'll pick it up
because I value it,
not just, oh, it's only
$0.05, and leave it there.
>> I got to share a story.
I was 9 years old, and my dad--
I went to my dad, and I said,
Dad, I want to earn some money,
because I want to buy
a baseball, and a bat,
and a glove.
And he said, well,
if you mow the yard.
Yes, because I had
those responsible.
Have you edged the sidewalk?
Yes.
Have you cut the hedges?
Have you swept the sidewalk?
Yes.
How to cleaned out the gutters?
Have you cleaned the garage?
Yes.
Have you pulled the weeds?
Have you cleaned your room?
Yes.
He said, Son, I don't
have anything else that
needs to be done, so I
can't just give you money
without you doing some service.
So I suggest you
go the neighbors
and see if you
can find something
profitable and
productive for them.
I went, OK.
So I went down the street.
I went up to the Evans,
which is two doors down,
and I saw that their
yard was sort of messy,
and I knew I could do
something about it.
And I asked if I could help
straighten up their yard.
And she said, well, how much?
And I didn't know what to think,
and so I just made up a number.
And they should, well,
that sounds fair.
And I spent most the
day clipping the hedges.
I got stung by bees, I
trimmed it, I did everything,
and I used all the
equipment from the garage.
And I went out and bought
a baseball and a glove
with the money I made.
And my dad said, I see you
got a new baseball and glove.
That's fantastic.
Where did you get it?
And I said, well, I
did what you said.
I worked.
He said, what
equipment did you use?
And I said, well, the
one in the garage.
He said, Son, I have
to teach you something.
There's a thing
called depreciation,
and there's cost in that
use of that equipment,
and let's calculate
what you did,
and let me calculate
what you owe me.
And it turned out to be $7.50.
Well, I'd already
spent the money.
So I went, oh, gosh.
And now I had to do two yards
to pay that back, plus what
I owed him for those two yards.
And I learned that that was
the responsibility I had.
And I understood that.
He explained it to me.
And then one day, I was
burned out a little bit,
working harder and making less.
And some kid came by on
a bicycle, and I saw him,
and I said, hey, would you
like to push lawnmower?
I'll pay you $0.50 to
push the lawnmower.
He said, yeah.
So I had three kids helping
do the yards, another three
kids, another three kids.
I got nine kids working.
I went in borrowed the
Zoobroads' and the Malas'
equipment across the street.
And I had three
pieces of equipment,
doing three yards at a time,
going through the neighborhood,
doing all the yards.
And I ended up paying
everybody else,
my dad off, everything else,
and I made a net of $45
after everything was paid.
This was in 1963, which
is about $700 a day
today, which is good money.
If I had a kid like
that, I'd had more kids.
So my dad saw that
that was happening,
but I was spending my money,
buying bicycles, buying
golf clubs, buying this and
that, and saw I wasn't saving.
So he bought me a
coin collection set,
and he bought me a piggy bank.
And he said, I want you
to put money in here
to teach you how
to learn to save,
because if you keep consuming
it, you'll always have to work.
But if you start saving
it, it will work for you.
So I flip the coin
collection and start
to put the right coins in
there, and it was kind of fun,
and thought longer term.
And I got the piggy bank.
My dad never gave me the
key or the combination
to open that piggy bank.
In my 52nd floor
building in Houston,
Texas, in my office
on the credenza
is that original
bank 52 years ago,
still sitting with the
same original coins.
It's worth probably-- I don't
even know how much today.
Those are original coins.
And it's still there, and I
never want to use that money,
because it is a metaphor
for thinking long term.
And then my father
did one more thing.
He said, I want you to know what
it's like to buy your freedom.
I said, what is that?
Every time he talks to
me, I'm losing money.
I said, what is that?
And he said, I want you to know
what it's like to have freedom,
so from now on, you're going
to pay for clothing, rent,
and food.
But now, you're going to have
freedom on your new bicycle
to go anywhere you want as long
as you're home at 9 o'clock
at night.
So I started exploring
35 mile bike rides,
40 mile bike rides on
my bike, and come back,
and be there by 9 o'clock,
and bought freedom,
but I had to pay
him $7.50 a week.
And in the process of
doing it, I got my freedom.
And he was trying to prepare
me for being an entrepreneur,
to let you know that the
more accountability you have,
the more opportunities
you have in life,
and I'm very grateful for that.
And sometime today, we don't
always-- we rescue people,
enable people instead of
making them accountable.
We rob them of dignity,
accountability, responsibility,
and productivity,
and then expect them
to have wealth consciousness.
They don't have a void to drive
them to want to build wealth.
And so as a result of it,
we have a social environment
where everybody's
expecting other people
to take care of them.
>> Could you give
us, before we finish,
maybe just three simple
exercises that our audience
could start doing for themselves
today that would start
to improve their
relationship with money?
>> Yeah.
>> I mean--
>> The first thing I would do
is make a list of everything you
do in a day, everything,
your entire day,
personal and professional.
And then put next
to it how much does
it produce per minute or hour?
How much does that
actually generate?
And then next to that, how
much meaning does it give you.
And next to that
is, what would it
be, the replacement
cost, if you had
to delegate that to somebody?
And next to it is how
much time is spent.
And get in touch with how
you're really managing your day
and looking at what you're
doing, because if you're
doing things all are lower
value and devaluing you,
you're going to have a
devalued consciousness.
But if you're doing
the highest priority
things, and most productive
things that serve the most
people, that produce
the most income,
you're going to raise
your wealth consciousness.
So first, do an inventory
about how you're really
spending your day,
because if you're
doing low priority things
and doing devalued things,
you're going to have
a devalued life.
But if you're doing the
highest priority things that
serve the most people, that make
the biggest difference, that
have meaning, that
you can't wait to do,
that makes a difference,
and you get rewarded for it,
then make, next, after
you identify that, make
sure you save a portion of
it, like you'd say, save 10%.
If you're 20 years
old, if you save 10%,
you can retire at 65
financially independent.
If you're 30 years old,
you'll need to do 20%.
If you're 40 years old, 30%.
50 years old, 40%.
60 years old, 50%
of your income.
So the longer you wait,
the harder it is to do,
and the less probable.
So the sooner you get
started on saving and then
learning to invest
after you've built up
a cushion of cash, the greater
your financial possibilities.
So save and then invest
before you ever speculate.
So save a portion of it, and
then make sure on a daily basis
that you're grateful
for what you get to do,
because when you're
grateful for what you get,
you get more to be grateful for.
And learn and study it.
Become educated on it,
because intelligent people
that really know
about wealth building
are the people that
end up with it.
I've never met a wealthy person
who didn't understand wealth.
So study and make it
a commitment to do it.
Warren Buffett, by age
11, had read every book
in Omaha, Nebraska Library on
wealth building and finance,
by the time he was 11.
So he's wealthy because
he had a value on it.
So, and also, one last thing.
Stack up 1,000 benefits of
why building a business,
managing a business wisely,
saving a portion of it,
investing in it,
accumulating it, and serving
a cause with it.
Write down 1,000 benefits
of doing those things.
If you do, you'll have a
bigger reason for doing it,
and you'll actually end up
with wealth, financially.
We all have wealth in
non-financial terms.
Our children, our social
life, our spiritual quest.
But if you want financial life,
a wealth in financial ways,
you'll have to have a value
on it and serve people.
>> Wonderful.
Thank you so much for
your time, your wisdom.
I've certainly reduced
my levels of anxiety
by following so much of your
guidance around finances.
And I hope that that's going to
be the same for our audience,
and I know it will be.
>> Thank you.